[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How will communicating
with nature help us survive
a crisis?
Hi, I'm Bruce Lipton.
I'm your host for this
series, "Inner Evolution."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The first episode of the
series presented the fact
that civilization is on
the brink of the sixth mass
extinction of life due to
the destructive behavior
of our beliefs and the
culture that they influence.
Four commonly held
misperceptions
have unfortunately disconnected
civilization from nature.
We have previously debunked the
first two of these assumptions,
that, A, biology is controlled
by Newtonian physics for we now
know it is controlled
by quantum physics
and, B, that genes
control our biology,
and now we recognize
it as epigenetics
that controls our biology.
The third and fourth
misperceptions
are based on incorrect
assumptions espoused
by the Darwinian
theory of evolution.
These misperceptions
led to the belief
that evolution is driven
by random alterations
in organismal genetics.
Consequently, genetics
has since become
the metric that
presumably defines
the character of evolution.
However, the Human Genome
Project completely undermined
this idea when it was found that
the human genome was no larger
than that for a 1,271-cell
microscopic worm.
Also incorrect is the
idea that competition
is the drive force
for evolution,
for now cooperation
is recognized
as encouraging evolution.
Lastly, the belief that random
accidental mutations initiate
evolution suggests that
there is no purpose
to our earthly existence.
We are here simply by chance.
To understand how we can survive
the current mass extinction
event, we must rewrite
our cultural beliefs
and learn how to live
in harmony with nature.
In addition to
acquiring awareness
at the fate of the planet's
remaining indigenous people,
we can learn a lot from studying
nature's fractal geometry.
Inherent in the principles
of fractal geometry
is the scientific foundation for
the ancient saying "as above,
so below."
Exploiting this character
of fractal structures
offers an opportunity to
acquire valuable life-enhancing
practices by studying the
life-sustaining behaviors
of organisms lower on
the evolutionary tree
and applying those lessons
directly to our lives.
So let's dive deeper
into this understanding.
The results of the Human Genome
Project reveal that evolution
cannot be understood in
terms of organismal genomes.
An understanding that
genetic alterations are not
due to chance is actually
recognized in the nature
of the immune system.
Consider this very
important fact.
If I inject an antigen into
your body, in three days,
you will create a
perfect antibody
to complement that
antigen. The significance
is an antibody is
the result of a gene.
Is there chance in this process
of creating an antibody?
No, because you can
actually predict that it
will occur in three days.
And so the significance
is simply this.
It's not a chance.
It's predictable.
And so the alteration of
the immune system's gene
to create an antibody is an
example of a directed mutation.
Organismal evolution
is actually connected
to efforts of an organism
to conform with its existing
environmental influences.
Evolution emphasizes
that organisms
adapt to support the
whole web of life.
Evolution has a purpose
to maintain harmony
in the environment.
Human civilization's
failure to understand
the nature of evolution is
responsible for precipitating
the planet's sixth
mass extinction.
Nature is expressed in the
form of physical structures
and space.
Nature employs
patterns that define
the structural
organization of matter.
Mathematicians
downloaded the principles
providing nature's
patterns and defined them
in terms of
mathematical formulas.
Geometry is the math of
creating structure in space.
Most people are aware
of Euclidean geometry,
the math associated
with points or dots,
lines, flat planes such
as rectangles, triangles,
and circles, and voluminous
structures, for example, cubes,
pyramids, and spheres.
Each of these objects has a
specific unit of dimension.
A dot or a point
is zero dimensions.
A line is one dimensional.
A flat plane is two dimensional.
And a cube or a sphere
is three dimensional.
This geometry is
used in architecture
and in the designing of
mechanical technology.
However, this geometry
does not reproduce
the designs nature
uses in creating
the web of life, such as a
fern, a mountain, or a cloud.
The new math, fractal geometry,
is a mathematic that models
nature.
This math is based
on the use of what
are called recursive
equations, which
mean an iterative procedure,
which, in itself, means
a repetitive process.
Place a number into a fractal
formula, solve the equation,
and then insert the result back
into the original equation.
Solve the equation again, and
reinsert the new answer back
into the original equation.
And this step can be
repeated infinitely.
A simple recursive
equation is this.
Take a 12-inch line
and cut it in half.
What do you get?
A 6-inch line.
So now we put a 6-inch line, cut
it in half, and what do we get?
A 3-inch line.
Take a 3-inch line,
cut it in half.
What do you get?
A 1-and-1/2-inch line.
I say, how many times
can I repeat this?
And the answer is infinitely.
You can keep taking the result
of solving the equation,
put it back into the equation,
and then solve it again.
So it could take millions
of iterations or repeats
in solving a fractal formula.
Before computers, it would
have taken several years
working eight hours a
day of manually solving
a fractal equation to actually
visualize the resulting
structure.
Point-- no one had ever
visualized the outcome
of these recursive formulas.
But in 1975, Benoit
Mandelbrot used IBM computers
to become the first
person to actually see
the structures produced
by the infinite regression
of a recursive equation.
His starting formula, referred
to as the Mandelbrot set,
reveal structural images
identical to those
found in nature.
He referred to this math
as fractal geometry.
For unlike Euclidean
geometry with whole integers
of dimensions, such as one
dimensional, two dimensional,
three dimensional, this math
had fractional dimensions.
What is a fractional
dimension of an object?
Well, for example, let's
take a piece of paper,
and imagine it has no
thickness, so it would represent
a two-dimensional surface area.
Now we take that piece of
paper and crinkle it up
into a small ball.
It will now have the appearance
of a three-dimensional object.
However, if you section
this wadded-up paper,
it still has a
two-dimensional geometry.
The object no longer
appears as two dimensional,
nor is it actually
three dimensional.
It would be best described as
having 2 and 1/2 dimensions,
a fraction of a dimension.
Nature is fractal, so
that a structural pattern
at one level of
nature's organization
will be self-similar to
the pattern of structures
at higher or lower
levels of organization.
Since structure is frequently
associated with function,
then the functions expressed
at one level of nature
will likely be self-similar
to the functions observed
at other levels of nature.
A model emphasizing
self-similarity
is illustrated in the nested
wooden Russian matryoshka
dolls, a set of self-similar
wooden dolls of decreasing size
placed one inside the other.
A fundamental example of a
biological fractal expressing
self-similarity is
evident in comparing
the structure and
function of a cell
with those of a human body.
All functional systems and their
basic structural organization
observed in human were already
present in a single cell.
If one understands a
physiological mechanism
or behavior expressed
by a cell, that insight
can be used to understand the
basic mechanisms of a human.
As above, so below.
An example of finding peace and
balance in a fractal universe
is to consider the 118 atoms in
the periodic table of elements.
In this periodic table,
all of the elements,
except for those listed as
noble gases, create chemistry.
The important
point is, then, how
come noble gases
don't make chemistry?
Noble gases include helium,
neon, argon, krypton, xenon,
and radon.
These atoms don't normally
engage in chemical reactions.
The reason is that all atoms
except for the noble gases
do not contain a balanced
or full number of electrons
in their outer electron shells.
These spinning
imbalanced atoms wobble,
which results in a
loss of their energy.
So to conserve energy,
an atom that wobbles
will couple with another
out-of-balance atom that
is also wobbling so that
the two, when connected,
may spin in harmony.
The problem in this
relationship is
that it represents a
co-dependency, wherein
neither element is free
because it wobbles on its own.
But when put together
in a molecule,
they will spin in
perfect balance.
In contrast, noble gas atoms
have a complete outer shell
of electrons, and they
spin in perfect balance.
They do not wobble.
Consequently, they don't need
another atom for balance,
nor are they even
thrown out of balance
by the wobble of other
atoms in their environment.
The understanding that
we get from noble gases
is that when an atom spins in
perfect harmony and balance,
that it is free and independent
of all the other atoms
and doesn't need to
bond with another atom
to maintain stability.
Well, how does
that relate to us?
And the answer is simply this.
During our developmental
period when
we were downloaded programs,
up to 70% of these programs
were disempowering,
self-sabotaging, and limiting.
When we start to
engage these behaviors,
we're not spinning in
balance and in harmony.
We're out of balance.
We're wobbling.
And as a result, many
people in this state
look for balance in their
lives by doing what?
Bonding with another
person, that when
they come together,
that together,
they will spin in harmony.
Well, that's taking two wobble
atoms or two wobble people
and bringing them together
in a codependent relationship
to create harmony.
However, what if we learn to
spin in harmony ourselves?
What if we change the programs
that cause us to wobble and put
in programs in our
subconscious mind that keep us
whole, healthy, and in harmony?
In that case, we would spin in
balance just like a noble gas.
And we would not be affected
by out-of-balance people
all around us.
Then we have a very
special life because we're
in harmony with ourselves.
In science's effort to
understand the nature of life,
science is focused on
evolution because that
was the mechanism that
controls the expression of all
the organisms on this planet.
Well, based on
looking at evolution,
what is the metric that
science is going to look at?
Well, the first thing is this.
An organism is
comprised of proteins,
and that proteins are
each created by a gene.
And in looking at the
complexity of organism
and the complexity
of their proteins,
biologists started to say,
look, organisms differ
in their physical complexity,
a reflection of their protein
mechanism, and that
their proteins are
a reflection of their genes.
So the nature of evolution
was some way tied
to the expression of genes.
At least that's
what they thought.
And in 2001, the results
of the Human Genome Project
were released.
And what they
found was something
that blew their minds.
Rather than having
over 100,000 genes,
the human had only about 20,000
genes, the same number of genes
as the most primitive
organism at the tree of life.
And all of a sudden,
it brought science down
to a very simple fact--
genes are not the
metric of evolution.
So science's effort
left the genes behind
and started to
understand the nature
of the structure of life.
Euclidean geometry, it's a
fabulous mathematics for what?
Creating buildings,
making machines,
and designing human technology.
But you cannot use conventional
Euclidean geometry to create
a fern, a tree, a cloud.
You can't do that.
It doesn't work.
Nature is structured on the
basis of fractional geometry
because this
geometry is not based
on whole integers of
dimensions such as one, two,
or three dimensional objects.
Because in fractal geometry,
there are such things
as 1-and-1/2-dimensional
objects,
2-and-1/2-dimensional objects,
fractions of an integer.
So when you use a
fractal equation
and put mathematics
into it and plop
these fractal geometries in a
computer, guess what you find.
The structures that result
from solving a fractal equation
are replicas of things
that we see in nature.
And all of a sudden,
it says, my goodness,
you can put a number into
a fractional equation
and create what?
Mountains with clouds.
All of a sudden, it says, this
is what nature is based on.
The significance is
profoundly important.
It says that when you
use fractal geometry,
the structures are repeated
in a self-similar fashion
at any level of organization.
So when you look at nature,
you could look at nature
from the level of
atoms to the level
of small bacterial organisms,
go up to the level of humans.
And guess what?
In this evolutionary
span, you'll
find the repetitive use
of the same structure
and the same function
all over again
and again, iterated, repeated.
Well, there's a very
important consequence
of understanding the
nature of iteration.
It says if you want to
understand something
like the structure or
function of how a human works,
do you have to work on
something this complex?
The answer is no.
You can get ideas and
information of self-similarity
by studying much
smaller structures that
are easier to understand.
So if you want to understand
how a human works,
think about this fact.
There's not one new function in
a human body that's not already
present in almost every
single cell in our body.
Single cells have what?
A respiratory, a digestive, an
excretory, a nervous system,
a reproductive system.
Single cells even
have an immune system.
Significance?
You want to understand
the function of a human?
It's pretty darn complex.
But if you study the
same functions that's
present in a single cell,
you'll get a basic insight
into the mechanisms that
provide for that function.
So instead of studying
very complex structures,
this is why we
study cell biology.
Because in studying the
nature, the structure,
and the functions
expressed by cells,
we can apply that information
and get an understanding
of much more complex structures,
such as that of the human body.
So there is a repetition of
self-similarity in the system.
Can we learn from that?
Well, of course we
can learn from that.
One of the most profound
things that we can learn
is the nature of
human relationships,
which seem to be an issue
on this planet at this time.
And I say, well,
what can we learn
from the geometry of
nature that can help us
create better relationships
on this planet?
And the answer is this.
We can study the atoms in the
periodic table of elements.
As mentioned earlier
in this episode,
the noble gases do
not create chemistry.
All the other
elements that don't
have a complete outer shell
wobble because there's
an imbalance in the electrons.
And when atoms wobble, that's
a very inefficient activity
for atoms because it
causes them to lose energy.
By forming chemistry
with another atom,
this allows the atoms to
spin in perfect balance.
So the atoms have a
tendency to stay together
because together, they can
have that harmony and balance.
This is what drives chemistry.
But noble gases are
completely full.
They don't wobble.
They spin in perfect
balance, in harmony.
Significance is so
important for this reason.
No matter how many other
atoms are around a noble gas
and they're out of
order and they're
wobbling all over the
place, the noble gas
will always stay
in perfect balance.
And then there's this
understanding that says, well,
wait, if atoms and noble
gas don't make chemistry,
then there's no relationship
between noble gases.
Well, I'm going to go
into that after I first
try to give us a
fractal correlation
of wobbling and
codependency and noble gases
as they relate to human biology.
Humans are spinning atoms,
just like anything else.
And most of us wobble
because we're not in balance.
We're not in harmony.
I say, what is throwing
a human out of balance,
losing the harmony
of that human?
And the answer is this.
As we described in
previous episodes,
the behavior of a human
is first programmed
in the first seven years
of life of that individual.
But what we also found out is
up to 70% of these programs
are disempowering,
self-sabotaging,
or limiting beliefs.
Consequence of that is
if you've been programmed
with these disempowering
beliefs, that means you won't
be able to spin in harmony.
Your harmony is
broken by the fact
that the way you are behaving on
this planet is not in harmony.
It's out of balance.
So we're sort of like
those out-of-balance atoms,
all moving around.
And just like an out-of-balance
atom, what's our intention?
To spin in harmony.
Harmony is peace.
I say, well, if you're
an out-of-balance person,
how can you find harmony?
Just the same way
that atoms did.
We will find a partner who
is also out of balance.
Because if they're
out of balance
and you're out of
balance, but you're
complementary to each other,
when you come together,
both of you can learn
how to spin and balance.
I go, oh, great,
this is a drive force
for creating relationship.
There's an unfortunate
side effect.
And that unfortunate side effect
is this kind of relationship
expresses itself as
co-dependency, meaning what?
That you have to hold on to
each other to stay in balance.
And that forces people to be
in relationships that sometimes
they don't want to be in.
But the choice is, if you're
not in that relationship,
now you're going to wobble.
And that's totally an
inefficient and inharmonious
way to be on the planet.
So co-dependent relationships
bring people together
with the need to spin
in balance, a need.
And that takes away
an individual's
personal independence
when this happens.
I say, well, guess what?
Not all people are
out of balance.
Some people are living
in perfect harmony
with their world.
Well, these are
the kind of people
that you would say, well, these
are like noble gas people.
They're spinning
in perfect balance.
So they can walk through a
crowd of out-of-balance people
and never be affected by them.
Now comes an interesting side
effect, and that is this.
Noble gases, as far as we
know, in normal chemistry
do not make relationships.
Would that imply
then a person who
is spinning in
harmony and balance
like a noble gas would
avoid a relationship?
No.
That wouldn't work very
well for us at all.
To understand something
that is really
important to the noble
gas's life is simply this.
When one of those perfectly
spinning noble gas atoms
gets hit by a photon
and absorbs that photon,
it becomes energized.
It becomes enlightened.
And in that state of
energized enlightenment,
guess what we find?
A noble gas will hook up
with another noble gas
and create what
is conventionally
referred to as a dimer.
But in a state where two
noble gases come together
because they're energized,
the term isn't dimer.
It's called excimer,
which is actually
an abbreviation for excitimer.
And why is it an excitimer?
Why is it an excited coupling
when they come together?
And the answer, as we will
see in the nature of bringing
noble gases together, is
that they emit laser light.
And in fact, all the
lasers on this planet
are driven by gas
in a laser tube.
And guess what?
All the gases and
lasers are noble gases.
How does a laser work?
It injects photons into the gas.
And as the noble gases
absorb these photons,
they get excited.
Then they couple with
other noble gases.
And then together, they
give off photons of light
as laser light.
Well, it also applies
to us as humans.
When we become enlightened
noble gases, guess what?
We, too, will hook up
with another noble gas,
another individual who
is also in balance.
As we come together as two
perfectly balanced individuals,
that relationship is a
fabulous relationship.
Why?
Because each individual is
still an independent element,
but they find that coming
together enhances them,
energizes them.
They give off laser light.
So the relevance is this.
How can we learn
to spin in balance?
And the answer is, well, how
come we're not in balance?
We go back to the first
seven years of programming,
and many of those programs
take us out of balance.
And what we now know is
we can go back and change
those programs.
And if we go back and
change those programs and we
ourselves learn how to
become in perfect balance,
we will then reflect
that noble gas.
We'll be enlightened.
We will not be affected
by those around us.
But what we will have
tracked is other individuals
in perfect balance.
And when two people in
perfect balance come together,
it's not co-dependency.
They're there because
together, they
create more energy and life
than when they're separated.
Couples in perfect
balance give off light
and change the world
in which we live.
And this is our intention.
If we understand the
nature of the fractal
and see how atoms can
live in perfect balance
and give off light and energy,
we can do the very same thing.
This is an example of
understanding a fractal
and using the fractal analogies
to create a better life for us
on the planet.
The significance of that
even extends further,
because what we now recognize
is to spin in perfect balance
really is reflecting something
about our consciousness,
creating a consciousness
that is in harmony
with the life around us.
Well, relevance of all
that is when we come back
in our next episode, we're
going to actually talk
about how
consciousness is really
influencing the evolution
of people on this planet.
And so in our next
and final episode,
we will use nature's
fractal geometry
to gain a new insight on
the mechanism of evolution.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
the series on "Inner Revolution
Through Biological Change."
[MUSIC PLAYING]